When we talk about storing data and
making it available for
data analytics, we usually describe our
process where data is physically moved
from various source systems into
a common location like a database.
This usually happens using something
called an extract, transform, and
load, or ETL, process.
As the name suggests, an ETL process
extracts data from one location,
transforms the data in some way, and
then loads the data into a new location,
again, generally some type of database.
Furthermore, when we want to analyze
data in a database, we generally pull
a specific data set from the database and
perform analytics using some other tool.
We might even reload some
data back into the database
like scores from a statistical model
to use in business operations.
The reason we do things this way is
largely driven by the computing storage
resources available in our data and
analytics environment.
Because ETL operations can be
very processing intensive,
we try to do them in the background
before data is needed by analysts.
Also because disk storage tends
to be a lot cheaper than memory,
we tend to keep data on disk and
use disk operations for
access, even though putting data in
memory would make the access much faster.
There's a reason why the disk storage on
your PC is measured in terabytes, but
the memory is measured in gigabytes.
Memory is a lot more expensive.
The downside of this approach is that
every time we move data from one place to
another, we increase the likelihood that
something might go wrong in the process.
And we insert some amount of delay
between the time the data is created and
when it is available for access.
However, as processing power and
memory become cheaper,
some additional options have emerged for
both storage and access for analytics.
In this video, we're going to briefly
cover four of these emerging ideas,
two related to data storage,
data virtualization and
data federation, and
two related to data storage for
analytics, in-memory computing and
in-database analytics.
The reason we cover this in a course
on analytics is that it's important for
you as the data analyst to understand
what mechanisms are used in
your data environment.
This will allow you to better interpret
what you're seeing, why you're seeing it,
and how relevant your findings are based
on when and where the data came from.
The more you know about your data and
your data environment,
the more effective you can be.
So let's start with data virtualization
and data federation, which are related but
slightly different concepts.
The idea behind data virtualization is
that we keep source data where it is for
each source, but we make it look like
all the data is in one place and
we allow users to access that
data using one common interface.
With data virtualization, we don't
necessarily seek to change the data or
integrate data from multiple sources.
But we make it a lot simpler for users
to get it without having to worry about
details of the underlying data format and
technology.
One advantage of data virtualization is
that we can avoid having to store data in
multiple places, namely in the source
system and in some target database.
Another advantage is that changes in
source data are usually reflected
immediately in the user access layer.
Since I don't need to wait for
ETL processes to run and
move the data from one place to another.
It's also easier to
alter the access layer,
should there be changes in the structure
of the underlying source data.
However, data virtualization
does have some limitations.
First and foremost,
while it removes a data layer in the
environment, it adds a processing layer.
And it can take longer to run
data extraction operations
since this additional layer must
translate user instructions
into whatever language is appropriate for
the sources in question.
Furthermore, if any data cleansing or
complex transformation
operations are required,
those processes add to the processing
load, and can further slow down access.
In these cases, it may actually be better
to use more traditional ETL processes.
Again, data virtualization alone only
makes data look like it's in one place.
It doesn't necessarily make sense of
how data from different sources relate
to each other, which one of
the primary advantages of constructing
a centralized database in the first place.
This is where data federation comes in.
With data federation, not only do we make
it look like data is in one place, but
we actually fit that data into
a common integrated data model.
We perform all the same transformations
and establish all the same relationships
among data entities that we would
do in a physical database, but
we do it all virtually.
That is,
without ever actually moving the data.
The advantages of data federation are
similar to those of data virtualization
with the added benefit of presenting
a more integrated view of
data from multiple sources to the user.
Of course, this comes at the cost
of even more complex processing
that can result in slower performance
when data is accessed or extracted.
Both data virtualization and
data federation are usually accomplished
using specialized software applications
that connect to a variety of
different source systems.
While they eliminate the need to move data
using ETL processes, they still require
development and maintenance to
establish those connections and
present a unified view of data to users.
Data virtualization and data federation
can be attractive in environments where
resources are limited,
the velocity of changes is very rapid,
little transformation or
integration is required, or
when sources have very high quality data
or store a lot of history themselves.
However, they become less
attractive as the volume or
complexity of transformations increase, or
when there is a need to store
historical data outside the source.
The other two ideas we want to discuss,
in-memory computing and
in-database analytics, are a little
different in that they seek to
maximize the performance of the analytical
operations versus minimizing data movement
in physical storage.
With in-memory computing,
all the data needed for
analysis is actually
loaded into a computer or
server's random access memory, or RAM,
where it can be accessed very quickly.
Typically, a whole data structure,
including relationships between data
entities, is stored and
available for analytical purposes.
The advantage of this approach
is obviously the speed.
As an analyst,
I can apply complex techniques to the data
in much less time than it
would take were I to try and
access data stored on disk locally or
on a remote server.
And once the data is in memory,
I can try a lot of different things
without having to wait too
long between each attempt.
This enables analytical efforts that
require exploration and trial and
error to accomplish.
To do this however,
I need to get the data into memory.
Unless my total data volume is pretty
small, it's far too expensive to store
all of it in memory and
to store it there all the time.
So what I usually need to do is execute a
one time load of some manageable subset of
data into memory for analysis.
Depending on how complex
my data set is and
how many entities are involved,
this load can take quite a while.
Many of the most popular data
visualization exploration tools
use some form of in-memory computing.
As do a number of specialized data
appliances that combine database and
data access operations.
In-database analytics also seeks
to speed up analytics, but
in kind of the opposite web
as in-memory computing.
Instead of moving the data to a place
where an analytical application can
manipulate it quickly,
with in-database analytics,
we move specific analytical
operations back into the database.
Where they can be quickly executed as
data is loaded into the database itself,
either using ETL or
other custom procedures.
So when would I do this?
Let's say I had developed a predictive or
prescriptive model that helped to detect
fraud, or which triggered certain
actions like stock trades or
price changes based on real time data.
By incorporating this model directly into
the database, I can drastically reduce
the time lag between the input events and
output actions based on that model.
In some situations,
even milliseconds can matter, so
I want to minimize any delay in action.
In-database analytics are ideal
in this type of situation.
Let's quickly recap what we've covered.
We talked about four emerging ideas
related to where data is stored for
accessing analytics.
We learned how data virtualization and
data federation minimize data movement and
storage requirements by making it
look like data is in one place.
And even in a common structure,
when in fact it is only
physically stored at the source.
We then discussed how in-memory
computing and in-database
analytics speed up the application of
analytics by storing data in memory and
moving analytical operations
into the database respectively.
One or more of these ideas may
exist within your data environment.
So be sure to learn what your
environment looks like and
how you can get the most out of it.